The heart is a powerful muscle that pumps
blood throughout the body by means of a
coordinated contraction. The contraction is
generated by an electrical activation, which is
spread by a wave of bioelectricity that
propagates in a coordinated manner
throughout the heart. Under normal conditions,
the sinoatrial node initiates an electrical
impulse that propagates through the atria to
the atrioventricular node, where a delay
permits ventricular filling before the electrical
impulse proceeds through the specialized
His-Purkinje conduction system that spreads
the electrical signal at speeds of meters per
second throughout the ventricles. This
electrical impulse propagates diffusively
through the heart and elevates the voltage at
each cell, producing an action potential, during
which a surge in intracellular calcium initiates
the mechanical contraction. The normal
rhythm is altered when one or more spiral
(reentrant) waves of electrical activity appear.
These waves are life-threatening because they
act as high-frequency sources and underlie
complex cardiac electrical dynamics such as
tachycardia and fibrillation
Heart: A powerful muscle slightly larger than a clenched fist. It is composed of four chambers, two upper (the
atria) and two lower (the ventricles). It works as a pump to send oxygen-rich blood through all the parts of the
body. A human heart beats an average of 100,000 times per day. During that time, it pumps more than 4,300
gallons of blood throughout the entire body.
Right Ventricle: The lower right chamber of the heart. During the normal cardiac cycle, the right ventricle
receives deoxygenated blood as the right atrium contracts. During this process the pulmonary valve is closed,
allowing the right ventricle to fill. Once both ventricles are full, they contract. As the right ventricle contracts, the
tricuspid valve closes and the pulmonary valve opens. The closure of the tricuspid valve prevents blood from
returning to the right atrium, and the opening of the pulmonary valve allows the blood to flow into the pulmonary
artery toward the lungs for oxygenation of the blood
The right and left ventricles contract simultaneously; however, because the right ventricle is thinner than the left,
it produces a lower pressure than the left when contracting. This lower pressure is sufficient to pump the
deoxygenated blood the short distance to the lungs.
Left Ventricle: The lower left chamber of the heart. During the normal cardiac cycle, the left ventricle receives
oxygenated blood through the mitral valve from the left atrium as it contracts. At the same time, the aortic valve
leading to the aorta is closed, allowing the ventricle to fill with blood. Once both ventricles are full, they
contract. As the left ventricle contracts, the mitral valve closes and the aortic valve opens. The closure of the
mitral valve prevents blood from returning to the left atrium, and the opening of the aortic valve allows the blood
to flow into the aorta and from there throughout the body. The left and right ventricles contract simultaneously;
however, because the left ventricle is thicker than the right, it produces a higher pressure than the right when
contracting. This higher pressure is necessary to pump the oxygenated blood throughout the body.
Right Atrium: The upper right chamber of the heart. During the normal cardiac cycle, the
right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the body (blood from the head and upper
body arrives through the superior vena cava, while blood from the legs and lower torso
arrives through the inferior vena cava). Once both atria are full, they contract, and the
deoxygenated blood from the right atrium flows into the right ventricle through the open
tricuspid valve
Left Atrium: The upper left chamber of the heart. During the normal cardiac cycle, the left
atrium receives oxygenated blood from the lungs through the pulmonary veins. Once both
atria are full, they contract, and the oxygenated blood from the left atrium flows into the
left ventricle through the open mitral valve.
Superior Vena Cava: One of the two main veins bringing deoxygenated blood from the
body to the heart. Veins from the head and upper body feed into the superior vena cava,
which empties into the right atrium of the heart.
Inferior Vena Cava: One of the two main veins bringing deoxygenated blood from the
body to the heart. Veins from the legs and lower torso feed into the inferior vena cava,
which empties into the right atrium of the heart.
Aorta: The central conduit from the heart to the body, the aorta carries oxygenated blood
from the left ventricle to the various parts of the body as the left ventricle contracts.
Because of the large pressure produced by the left ventricle, the aorta is the largest single
blood vessel in the body and is approximately the diameter of the thumb. The aorta
proceeds from the left ventricle of the heart through the chest and through the abdomen and
ends by dividing into the two common iliac arteries, which continue to the legs.
Atrial septum: The wall between the two upper chambers (the right and left atrium) of the
heart.
Pulmonary trunk: A vessel that conveys deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle of
the heart to the right and left pulmonary arteries, which proceed to the lungs. When the
right ventricle contacts, the blood inside it is put under pressure and the tricuspid valve
between the right atrium and right ventricle closes. The only exit for blood from the right
ventricle is then through the pulmonary trunk. The arterial structure stemming from the
pulmonary trunk is the only place in the body where arteries transport deoxygenated blood.
Pulmonary veins: The vessels that transport oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left
atrium. The pulmonary veins are the only veins to carry oxygenated blood.
Pulmonary Valve: One of the four one-way valves that keep blood moving properly
through the various chambers of the heart. The pulmonary valve separates the right
ventricle from the pulmonary artery. As the ventricles contract, it opens to allow the
deoxygenated blood collected in the right ventricle to flow to the lungs. It closes as the
ventricles relax, preventing blood from returning to the heart.
Aortic Valve: One of the four one-way valves that keep blood moving properly through
the various chambers of the heart. The aortic valve, also called a semi-lunar valve,
separates the left ventricle from the aorta. As the ventricles contract, it opens to allow
the oxygenated blood collected in the left ventricle to flow throughout the body. It closes
as the ventricles relax, preventing blood from returning to the heart. Valves on the
heart’s left side need to withstand much higher pressures than those on the right side.
Sometimes they can wear out and leak or become thick and stiff.